Diversity of feature films: Production, co-production and distribution A key point for the analysis of diversity in the audiovisual sector is the array of contents that are made available to those who ultimately are (or are not) the end users. In the film industry, a cultural sector with a high degree of internationalisation, a chain of intermediaries – from creators to production companies, distributors and cinemas – is set in motion for films to reach the big screens. To evaluate the diversity of film systems, it is particularly interesting to observe not only the film production phase but also, and importantly, the operation of the distribution sector. This sector is directly involved in the definition of which movies make it to the theatres and in what terms they are premiered. In most countries, local distributors face the competition, and practices, of the so-called ‘Hollywood majors’, which have dominant positions and offer screening opportunities to the most commercially successful films. During the 2005-2013 period, the production of feature films increased globally to a record of 7,610 films made. A remarkable share were made by the top five producing countries, led by India. This is further analysed in this section. This section also describes an instrument of cultural diversity: international co-productions of feature films. Led by organizations from France and the United States during the 2012-2013 biennium, this practice – supported by numerous States and led by commercial companies – provides a means of increasing the international dissemination of movies and of accessing new markets. Finally, this section addresses the distribution of films in cinemas and the problem of business concentration (i.e. the dominant presence of the so-called ‘U.S. majors’ in several countries) present in this link of the film industry value chain. 2.1 Worldwide production and countries with leading production In 2012, 7,478 feature films were produced by a total of 88 countries. In 2013, this figure grew to 7,610 feature films produced by companies in 86 countries (see Figure 2). There was a 13% growth in worldwide production, comparing production by 90 countries in 2011 to 88 countries in 2012. This significant rise in global film production – the highest year-to-year growth during the 2005-2013 period – was crowned by a growth of 1.8% in 2013. In general terms, it is possible to observe that data for the 2012-2013 biennium add to the continuity of the upward curve in global film production over recent years. As shown in Table 1, the worldwide production of feature films has grown by 64% since 2005. Throughout the 2005-2013 period, the set of countries included in Table 1 represented over 50% of worldwide production, which demonstrates strong geographic concentration in some of the most heavily populated countries of the world, in spite of the diversity of feature filmproducing countries. With the exception of large U.S. companies whose feature films are distributed and seen on the five continents, production from the other four leading countries generally have geographically more restricted circulation. Feature films produced in India, for instance, are popular with the Indian diaspora, as well as Afghanistan, Egypt, Nigeria and Pakistan.


2.2 International co-production of feature films The international co-production of feature films, which involves companies from two or more countries that finance and produce films, can be considered a gateway to diversity of cultural expressions as it enables the exchange of human resources – both technical and artistic – across countries and, undoubtedly, facilitates the circulation of films across two or more film markets. In this regard, for instance, the European Convention on Cinematographic Coproduction (CE, 1992) considers international co-production as “an instrument of creation and expression of cultural diversity”. It is worth noting that international co-production is a practice that started in the mid-20th century among companies from countries with major historical, cultural and/or linguistic ties. Furthermore, since the late 20th century, governments from wide political spectrums have been encouraging co-productions with other countries through international programmes, such as the Ibermedia Programme introduced in 1996 for the Ibero-American area. In a highly competitive and globalised market, international co-production is a way for film production companies to broaden their markets of operation. In practice, through international co-production a feature film can have two or more ‘nationalities’, paving the way for tax incentives offered by different countries and taking advantage of other forms of public support designed to promote film production, distribution and/or screening. A study conducted at the end of the last decade by the European Audiovisual Observatory compared commercial circulation and performance of European co-productions to films of a single nationality, both inside and outside the respective national markets. The study drew the following conclusions: a) co-productions are released, on average, in twice as many - 11 - markets as national productions; b) co-productions have revenues that are, on average, 2.78 times higher than national productions; and c) international commercial operation is larger for co-productions than for national productions – the international market provides 41% of coproduction revenues compared to 15% for national productions (Kanzler, 2008: 1). Data available for international co-productions (data are lacking for several countries, like China) show that international co-production is a widespread practice in the western area of the European Union and in the United States. Table 3 shows France as the main country involved in international co-production activities during the 2012-2013 biennium: 245 feature films were co-produced (129 in 2012 and 116 in 2013), mainly in partnership with companies from other countries with geographical proximity: Belgium (84 feature films), Germany (45) and Italy (27). Overall, those three countries were involved in almost 64% of French co-productions. U.S. companies, on the other hand, produced a total of 209 feature films over the same period (115 in 2012 and 94 in 2013), mainly in partnership with companies from the United Kingdom (67 films), France (42) and Canada (33). Those three countries took part, in conjunction, in approximately 68% of U.S. co-productions. It should be noted that, amongst the leading co-producing countries, the weight of international cinematographic engagements reached high shares in Belgium, Ireland and the Netherlands, even though these countries do not have a large production base. Co-production shares were 87% in 2012 and 76% in 2013 in the total share of Belgian feature films; for Ireland, these percentages were 68% and 62% in 2012 and 2013, respectively, while Netherlands’ coproductions had a share of 49% in 2012 and 50% in 2013. In recent years, the major production companies have broken down entry barriers for the powerful and increasingly profitable Chinese market. 7 Currently, Disney, Universal, Sony, Warner and DreamWorks Animation have joint ventures with Chinese companies for film coproduction and/or distribution or for the introduction of new technologies. The U.S. majors’ strategy is to produce with their Chinese partners on site for a fast-growing market while starting to export the same films to other territories. Examples of the complex relations in the film industry between the United States and Chinese companies (Masters, 2013) and of their growing co-production activity include: Iron Man 3 (Marvel Studios/Paramount in partnership with Chinese DMG Entertainment) Transformers: Age of Extinction (Paramount and others, with China Movie Channel), and the animation film Kung Fu Panda 3 (DreamWorks Animation with Oriental DreamWorks) scheduled for worldwide release in 2016.


Feature film distribution A key sector for analysing the diversity of the film industry is distribution. Distribution companies are directly linked to the diversity offered8 to potential spectators, acting in many markets and reaching diverse audiences through cinema complexes. Focusing on the distribution of feature films in theatres, the world’s most successful films were distributed and promoted by companies belonging to the U.S. majors: Buena Vista (an affiliate of the Walt Disney Company), Sony Pictures Releasing, Twentieth Century Fox, Universal Pictures, Warner Brothers and Paramount Pictures. These companies have a dominant position in several countries of the world (in Latin America and Western Europe, for instance) and rule the distribution of both Hollywood blockbusters and locally-produced films that are likely to become commercial hits in their respective markets. In addition, often the U.S. majors operate in foreign markets in a coordinated fashion, to the detriment of local productions and independent distributors, as can be seen in Spain (TDC, 2006). This has a negative impact on the diversity of feature films that the markets can offer to local audiences. Thus, many feature films do not access screening slots in the theatres of their country of origin. 9 As shown in Table 4, a review of the international distribution of the most popular feature films during the 2012-2013 biennium reveals that there is a clear domination of the U.S. majors in this field. During this period, Warner Brothers distributed some of the U.S. films with the highest commercial success at the international level, including The Dark Knight Rises, The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey, The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug, Gravity, Pacific Rim, and The Hangover Part III. Buena Vista (Disney) distributed Marvel's The Avengers, Brave, Wreck-It Ralph, Frozen, Iron Man 3, Monsters University, Thor: The Dark World, and Oz The Great and Powerful, to name but a few. And Paramount Pictures distributed Madagascar 3: Europe's Most Wanted, World War Z, Star Trek Into Darkness, The Wolf of Wall Street, and G.I. Joe: Retaliation. In contrast with the wide-ranging dissemination at the international scale reached by U.S. productions, the distribution of feature films beyond the borders of the countries that produce them is a serious problem in regions such as Europe and Latin America. As mentioned by the European Commission when launching its ‘European Film in the Digital Era’ strategy in 2014, “the number of movies made in Europe went from 1,100 in 2008 to 1,300 in 2012, but for the most part they are only screened in the country of their production and rarely reach distribution across borders”. Therefore, the European Union has a new strategy aimed at the “need to take full advantage of the new distribution methods to drive cultural diversity and competitiveness” (EC, 2014).


Diversity of feature films The goods and services derived from cultural industries are, by nature, vehicles of the expression of values, customs, languages, gastronomies, etc. This is the view of the UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, which states that “cultural activities, goods and services have both an economic and a cultural nature, because they convey identities, values and meanings” (UNESCO, 2005, Preamble). Since its inception, cinema has been a major vehicle for the cultural expression of nations. This has been complemented from the middle of the last century by television. Feature films – the main industrial product of the sector – can be analysed based on various characteristics: film genres, aesthetics, languages used, ideas expressed, social sectors represented, patterns of behaviour, etc. This section first analyses the linguistic diversity of feature films, based on data provided by (or estimated from) 54 countries in 2012 and 53 countries in 2013. To that end, the components of variety and balance discussed by Stirling (1988, 2007) in his examination of the concept of diversity are studied. This analysis is followed by a review of the production companies of over 60 countries based on the film categories in the 2014 UIS Questionnaire on Feature Films Statistics: fiction feature films, documentaries and animation movies. Additionally, the distribution of feature films across the three categories (balance) is analysed, taking into account production in 12 countries. 3.1 Language diversity The Preamble of the UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of Diversity of Cultural Expressions reads, “Linguistic diversity is a fundamental element of cultural diversity” (UNESCO, 2005). Albornoz and García Leiva (2016) state that advocating linguistic diversity is an imperative for the international community, as every language reflects a one-of-a-kind vision of the world, with its own value system, its specific philosophy and its particular cultural characteristics. A language provides support to an identity and is an essential element of an irreplaceable cultural wealth. Feature films, as well as other cultural expressions, provide a channel of expression and dissemination for approximately 6,000 languages which are spoken in the world. 11 As several studies have pointed out (Ranaivoson, 2007; UIS, 2011), diversity is a multidimensional concept. Stirling’s definition (1998, 2007) of diversity includes a combination of three components: variety, balance and disparity. Variety refers to the number of different categories defined; specifically for films, we may ask, how many languages can be identified in the cinematographic production of a country? Balance refers to the extent to which these categories are represented: what percentages of each language are used in films? And disparity refers to the degree of dissimilarity that exists between the different categories: how different are the languages used? Thus, the larger the number of categories and the more balanced and disparate the categories, the more diverse the system. 11 It is estimated that approximately one-half of the languages that are spoken today in the world are endangered languages and they may become extinct before the end of the century. 96% of those languages are spoken by 4% of humanity (UNESCO, 2010). - 16 - Data on 54 and 52 countries for 2012 and 2013, respectively, show that several countries have produced feature films in several languages (e.g. Spain, Morocco, South Africa and Switzerland) catering to the diversity of their social and linguistic constituents. In other cases, production companies in countries with small populations and minority languages seek a wider dissemination of their products by producing films in languages other than the local one (e.g. Sweden and Slovakia). Based on data available in the UIS Data Centre (http://www.uis.unesco.org/datacentre), the diversity of feature films can be analysed by the presence of different linguistic categories, i.e. feature films using one language (monolingual) or a combination of two or more languages (multilingual); a same language may be in more than one category; and ‘other languages’ includes monolingual and/or multilingual films. In 2013, for instance, Armenia produced 28 movies in Armenian, Canada produced 59 movies in English and 34 in French, Chile produced 30 movies in Spanish and one in Italian/English, and France produced 209 movies in French and 61 in ‘other languages’. In these cases, Armenia has one linguistic category while Canada, Chile and France have two linguistic categories each. Additionally, based on these data, Chile has multilingual movies (one feature film), Canada does not have any (they are monolingual movies in English or French), and France may have some (there might be one or more multilingual movies in the ‘other languages’ category).12 According to UIS data, in 2012, 35% of the 54 countries had monolingual productions of feature films, while 26% made movies in two linguistic categories (see Figure 3). That means that in 61% of the countries with data available the use of one or two languages prevailed. In contrast, a minority of countries stated using more than five linguistic categories in their cinematographic productions: six in Spain, Sweden and Switzerland (the three of them including the ‘other languages’ category); seven in Finland (including ‘other languages’), Ireland and Portugal; nine in Slovenia (including ‘other languages’) and the United Kingdom; and – according to data from the Film Federation of India – 35 categories in India. In 2013 in 52 countries with data available, the share of countries with film productions using a single language dropped to 27%, while the percentage of countries using two linguistic categories rose to 30% (see Figure 4). In contrast, Ireland, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland shot feature films in six categories (the latter three countries including the ‘other languages’ category); Lithuania, Portugal and South Africa in seven categories; Slovenia in eight (including ‘other languages’); Finland in 10 (including ‘other languages’); the United Kingdom in 11 (including ‘other languages’); and – according to data from the Film Federation of India – 38 categories in India.